Total hip arthroplasty,
also called total hip replacement,
begins with an incision to allow
access to the bones of the hip joint.
The next step is to remove
damaged cartilage and bone
from the acetabulum,
the cup-shaped hollow in the pelvic bone.
This damage results from the
bones rubbing directly against each other
when protective cartilage wears away.
A tool called a reamer
is used to prepare the hip bone
to receive the socket portion
of the hip replacement.
This metal and plastic combination
is called the acetabular component
and is fitted into the
newly reamed surface
of healthy bone and tissue.
The outer, metal part of this component,
sometimes called a cup,
fits directly into the socket.
The inner, plastic portion
has a hollow to hold the replacement
for the ball-shaped bone at the
top of the thighbone, or femur.
The outer, metal part is rough
to help bone grow into its surface over time
to lock the artificial socket in place.
The next step
is removing the ball-shaped head
of the femur, or thighbone,
and preparing the femur for placement
of the stem portion of the component.
A metal ball is attached
to the end of the stem
and fits into the artificial socket
in the hipbone.
Together, these components replace
the natural ball and socket joint.
During and after surgery,
the surgeon verifies the correct fit
and range of motion
of the hip replacement components.
By mimicking the anatomy and function
of the natural hip joint,
hip replacement can reduce pain
and permit a return to many activities.